---
title: Misc stuff
---


## Nature and purpose

Fundamentally, all communication is about making another person
understand something which you have to say, which could be a request/
demand, an explanation etc.. .

So, in designing the delivery mechanism, one should not only consider
the message to be delivered, but also the other person’s ability to
receive that message.

### dharmAya saMvAdaH

dharme viniyogAya cha anyeShAM sahayogAya cha saMvAdaH AvashyakaH. eShaH
dheyaH samyak dharitavyaH.

dharme samyak kArya-karaNAya eva sAmAjikAH AchArAH.

Even by silently observing or by being absent, you are participating.

## Branding: enabling precise appraisal

### Aim: honest appraisal

Don’t worry about impressing people too much. Just be honest, don’t feel
that you have to project a false image of yourself, while simultaneously
avoiding erroneous perception of you by others.

Sincerity and self confidence involved in doing so are valued.

### Informing others of your worth

Discreetly sell your work and worth - It is insane to expect others to
do it entirely for you. "If I tell you I’m good, you would probably
think I’m boasting. If I tell you I’m no good, you know I’m lying." -
Bruce Lee

### Branding

A powerful brand - built not on a product but on a personal message - is
a competitive advantage.

Aim to truthfully project both competence and warmth.

Gravity and immersion/ mastery over an art are appreciated deeply -
display this. Even though he was not especially kind or considerate,
Ramanujan was very likable. He wore his heart on his sleeve. He was
humble in attitude. His sincerity resulted in the magnetic personality
of a secular sanyasi.

#### svarUpa-saMskAraH

Often questions are raised about various aspects of the brAhmaNa
saMpradAya - especially shrIcharaNaM, yajJNOpavItaM and shikhA. It is
good to have well-prepared responses.

’These are the customs of my people. They are a very important part of
my cultural identity, so I value them very much. They are a critical
piece of who I am. If I were to cut any of them out, it would be akin to
loosing a piece of my soul.’

## Biological mechanism

Important hormones such as oxytocin and endorphins are considered
elsewhere.

## Areas in need of improvment

Using names while greeting.

Accurately projecting warmth along with competence.

## Incidental meetings

What to do when you unexpectedly meet someone?

### Greeting

If you are greeted, whether by an acquaintance or by a stranger, return
the greeting.

### Acquaintances

#### Goal: smooth functioning

Behaviour here should ensure smooth functioning of both you and of other
animals. Example: greeting acquaintances is important for your own
smooth functioning.

#### Greeting protocol

If you encounter an acquaintance whom you have not encountered many
times during that day, if significant eye contact is made, greet with a
smile and pronunciation of his name. Note that significant eye contact
is not possible if the other animal is involved in another conversation.

If you encounter an acquaintance whom you have encountered many times
during the past few hours, merely acknowledge with a nod, and perhaps a
smile.

#### Serendipitious conversation

Adapt the confidential voice.

## Debate

### Discipline

#### Need

A certain discipline is essential in picking points, supporting
arguments and criticizing them in a systematic manner - otherwise people
simply resort making irrelevant statements and arguments (eg: erecting
and taking down strawmen), making unsound arguments, starting from false
premises, finally resorting to to venting/ rhetoric and no one comes
closer to the truth.

#### Expected structure

The discussion should have clear stages.

##### Specifying claims

First one specifies as precisely as possible the claims which are
contested. (Often the claims being discussed are not clearly specified:
it could be that both parties actually agree to the claims, but
confusedly discuss and contest minutiae for a long time before realizing
that they both agree.)

##### Filtering and picking claim to contest

Both parties should state their positions on the claims. If they both
agree on a certain claim, it need not be discussed further, but may be
taken as an axiom.

##### Argument and refutation

A party may take up the burden of proof and provide an argument
supporting or refuting the claim. The opposite party then has the burden
of refutation - it must find a flaw in the argument.

This process is continued until either all arguments are refuted or
unrefuted arguments in favor of only one party remain.

##### Closure and continuation

Based on the prior step, both parties reach a consensus on the status of
the claim for the purpose of the argument, which could be one of : true,
false, unknown.

One then continues to the ’Filtering and picking claim to contest’
stage.

#### Ground rules

Jumping from claim to claim should be curbed.

’Red herrings’, presenting provocative unrelated topics in order to
detract the conversation, should be avoided.

##### External references

Pasting entire articles is bad etiquette - it makes scrolling a pain,
and it will not force anyone to read it. One should provide links if
necessary with a brief description as to why it is relevant and why one
would want to go read it.

##### Role of ridicule

I myself am happy to receive and give ridicule as a way of making a
point clear.

But others may not like it. "There is no reason for anyone to be
ridiculed." It is true that arguments involving males are often
conducted according to (testosterone driven?) aggressive rules which
females are uncomfortable with; I have seen it in many places and it is
probably insensitive of us to do so. Bullying is bad.

#### Fallacies in arguments

Starting from a false premise.

##### Addressing the wrong claim

It is especially common to pick an easy-to-refute claim which is
different from the contested claim but is superficially similar for the
purpose of refutation: aka strawman.

##### Logical error in the argument

Common fallacies include presenting a false-dichotomy in an implication.

#### Enforcement

Acknowledge that they may be making good points, then point out errors.

##### Insufficient empathy correction

I don’t think that you are making sufficient effort in understanding the
perspective of those you are speaking to properly - otherwise you would
have known that many of the arguments / references you make will have no
effect on their positions at all. Maybe a good idea to empathize, talk
to them rather than at them - perhaps you will learn something in the
process yourself.

##### Insufficient homework

First, one needs to do some basic homework required to understand the
basics about.

##### Encouragement for continuation

Systematic and clear thinking is important, everyone gets better with
deliberate practice; It takes some effort, but you must believe that can
do it right.

### bhAvanA-niyantraNaM

tarkaH bAlEShu krIDA iva bhUyAt.

tarka-parAjaya-AtaÑkaH bhavati. Etat-bhayaH niVarayEt tat-bhayasya
vachanaiH vadanAt cha svIkArAt. antE “satyaM Eva jayatE, nAnRRitaM” iti
vishvAsaH bhUyAt.

The truth will win in the end, and it should ideally be clear to all
participants at the end of the debate.

tarka-vidhiH cha mantrAH anyatra vivRRitAH.

### Allowing saving of face

The ground rules established should be such that focus is sharply on the
topics being discussed, and the ground rules - this makes discussion a
relatively inoffensive impersonal mechanical process.

Even when you win a debate clearly, allow for face saving by conceding
that the argument was good and that it is natural to be misled.

## Negotiations

Use the Statue strategy to project forcefulness when necessary.

It is always better to take time to think and then produce a response,
than to produce a bad response.

Don’t be fooled by smooth-talkers. They work mostly by making you take
instantaneous decisions. Take as much time as you can while taking major
decisions - such as those that involve a lot of money.

Determine the other person’s motivation in interacting with you.

Negotiation is best done early: before everyone is too estranged to be
rational.

Even if you are getting a free service, you have right to every courtesy
due to a customer, and to the promised service in full. Be forceful but
polite in demanding it. Remember that you can ask to see the boss.

Get things in writing.

## Establishing good memories in others

People choose between memories of experiences, rather than experiences
themselves. So, the ending is extremely important in any interaction.
Giving gifts at the end of formal occasions is a good idea.

## Email and phone

### Email protocols

In sending keep-alive messages, try to mail individually.

While sending messages which might offend the other person, be careful
and use tact.

#### Addressing others

In America, suppose that you are writing to X. The letter might begin
with the string ’X,’ unlike in other countries where one begins with the
string ’Dear X,’ or ’Hi X,’.

This is used to indicate a professional attitude stripped of compassion/
friendliness. It is used to focus the conversation on work and challenge
the recipient into performing his role, with an ongoing appraisal being
the incentive.

By itself, this form of addressing should not be assumed to be a sign of
excessive rudeness, but as a sign of deliberate distance, used to make
reasonable demands.

#### Role of email

Know when to prefer face-to-face communication: "When you communicate
with a group you only know through electronic channels, it’s like having
functional Asperger’s Syndrome“ you are very logical and rational, but
emotionally brittle."

#### Awaiting Response

If someone does not respond to an email in 48 hours, bug them.

### Phone calls

#### Work-related

Turn phone calls into emails - so that you have a record of things
agreed upon.

Wear formal dress - this greatly helps foster a professional attitude in
the phone conversation.

Smile if you would have smiled in an in-person meeting - the smile helps
connect to the other person, even across the telephone line.

## Apologizing techniques

Focus on your direct actions. Do not make non-apologies like "I’m sorry
if you were offended by my remarks". Acknowledge the consequences of
your actions. Focus on the other party, not on yourself. Take
responsibility. Try to rectify the error. Offer material compensation.
Rolando offered me 1/2 month’s rent reduction after vexing me during the
move-in.

## Technical discussions, lectures, interviews

See ’Career skills’ strategy.

## Conning and lying

Control of body language during lying, and its detection are considered
elsewhere.

Conning requires generation of trust on the part of the victim. One
clever way of doing this is by stimulating oxytocin generation in the
victim by appearing to place trust and regard in him, thus triggering
the reciprocation mechanism. Eg: Pegion drop con.

Even simple lying exploits to a certain extant the willingness of the
victim to be lied to, his eagerness to believe in something false.

