---
title: Real time interactions
---

## Composing oneself before planned meetings

Prepare content in advance if necessary.

### Calming turbulence

#### Importance

This is especially important while meeting strangers.

Most people do not want to be burdened by an unsettled, harried
individual - they are wary of getting tangled in unsavoury business.

#### General technique

Concentrate on the high order bits: the important matter. Solemnly
recognize that exchange of information/ expectations is the most
important point of the meeting and determinedly focus the intellect on
it.

#### Suppressing inopportune reactions

It may sometimes be inopportune to feel or display laughter or anger or
nervousness.

Use breath control. (PraaNaayaama)

### Atma-parichayaH

pAshchAtyasha vA bhAratIyasya vA itarANAM saMskRRItInAM suguNAnAM cha
durguNAnAM brAhmaNa-dharma-bhakytAH cha parichayaH bhavet vyavasthitaH,
tat adhaH likhitaH.

saMskRRite cha susaMskRRityAM mayi abhimAnaH vartate. vedeSu udAttAH
vichArAH dRRishyante. vaidikaH saMpradAyaH me sArthakaH, tat mama asti
iti mama saubhAgyaH. tIkShNabuddhiH, Atma-niyantraNaM, dharmaH etat
sarvaM tat-pAlana-phalAH. mama prajAyAH api eShaH saubhAgyaH bhavatu iti
AShA.

### Dress strategy

Dressing in clothing in light/bright colors will make you stand out more
in a crowd and look more approachable.

Wear something comfortable, but which will project the impression of one
serious in his work.

### Timing

When you are overtly trying to sell something, for example your
qualifications, do it only when you are adequately prepared, otherwise,
you may create an unfavorable impression leading to the failure of the
mission.

Do not interrupt a person who is known to dislike interruptions.

## Content

In conversation, it is better to talk about others’ work and learn, than
to talk about oneself.

Ask questions that require more than a simple "yes" or "no" answer to
subtly encourage a shy or introverted person to keep talking.

Conduct interviews. Make them talk about themselves and their work.

Be prepared - try not to ask questions which could have been answered by
other means. Special questions: How did you get your job? How did you
decide you wanted to pursue this specific career? Did you have a mentor
who helped you? Did you have role models? What satisfactions do you get
from your position? Did the organizational culture turn out to be what
you expected? How were the most recently employed people hired? How
would you suggest someone with my background to look for a job?
Professors: Do you have any suggestions which may help my research or
graduate studies?

Prepare answers for questions.

Compliment them - Everyone has an ego. But, don’t overdo it.

If they’re close, inquire about their family.

### Exchange stories

Eg, in case of friends: Ask for a personal story of childhood or home,
and give one in return.

## Beginning and ending

### Beginning meetings

This is especially important if you are meeting a stranger.

Greet confidently. Introduce yourself. Greet with hand, eyes, face and
words. Be specific: say their name, thence give them pleasure.

### Ending meetings

Do this gracefully, not awkwardly. The ending is specially important.

## Courtesy and formality

Be courteous. Discourtesy implies not wanting friendship. Formality in
politics and diplomacy was not invented without reason.

Courtesy is required for smooth operation, without misunderstandings, in
the society of strangers. This is particularly useful, if help or
information is later required from those strangers.

Common courtesys: Hold heavy doors open for people who are just behind
you. Follow the queue system. Shake hands. Stand when others are
standing.

Say please. But, don’t overdo it.

Do not take anything for granted.

Include name with high frequency.

## Language, accent, voice

Use an accent understandable by them.

Use the language closest to their native language.

### Voices

#### Confidential voice

Drop defenses, smile. Adapt a calm, soft/ confidential voice.

#### Commanding voice

Adapt a deep tone, clear and easily heard voice, act as if it is your
right to be obeyed.

## Body language

### parichayaM

The body language is indeed a language with words and phrases. The body
can communicate even when there are no spoken words. The primary
function of body language is to express emotions and status among
surrounding animals; and its vocabulary is specialized for that. Using
body language, one can speak multiple words simultaneously.

### Importance of mastering it

Body language is widely understood, often unconsciously. Bad skill at it
is often results in miscommunication. So, its vocabulary should be
mastered systematically.

Just as one can speak words to oneself, one can use the body language to
speak to oneself to great effect\!

Realize that a significant minority does not speak it well.

### Vocabulary

#### Confidence

Prolonged eye contact, relaxed but alert posture.

#### Friendliness, welcoming interaction

Smile. Nod.

##### Depth, truthfulness

The basic idea in understanding a smile is imitate it. Observe if the
eyes are wrinkled.

#### Trustworthiness, appeasement

Mirror others’ body language.

#### Acknowledgement of superiority

añjali-mudrA. Back slightly bent forward. Hands folded submissively.

#### Doubt or mental processing

One of the eyes narrowed at the outer corner. Raised eyebrows. Pursed
lip.

Lowered eyebrows and squinted eyes illustrate an attempt at
understanding what is being said or going on. It’s usually skeptical.

#### Authority, firmness

Act like a statue: Your secure position does not require you to care for
making others comfortable by mirroring. (Observed in bosses of
corporations, mafia and emperors.)

#### Boredom and distraction

People who look away while you are talking to them are thinking about
something else.

#### Solitude

People with crossed arms are closing themselves to social influence.

#### Anger

Bulged eye-balls. Flared nose. Eyes narrowed at the inner corner.

#### Fear

Arms fending unseen things away: Adjusting cufflinks, purses etc..
Casual face touching. The hand shrug: palm upward, fingers slightly
curled. Squirming.

#### Anxiety

##### Detecting lies

Outward calm and inner turbulance. A trained person can detect lies with
great accuracy. While the other is speaking, look for fear.

##### Uncomfortable truthfulness

When the other person is silent, these could also indicate uncomfortable
truthfulness.

### Expert lying

Sincerity is very important. But, in some situations, lying is
inevitable. Avoid non-verbal leakage.

#### Statue strategy

Deadpan face. Eyes concealed by glasses (Pupil dilation is involuntary,
and can reveal interest level). Rigid body, Minimal hand movement. Seen
in dominant males of many species, emperors, corporate heads. Indicates
a lack of need to pander to companions.

#### Flase clown strategy

Mock-aggression or mock-friendliness. Throw in much body language noise.
Could even be used as a permanent mask in the Orient (and Iran, I hear).

#### Erratic signaling

Deliberately misleading signalling. Very tough to execute correctly, but
very effective.
