---
title: Research
---

## The career objective

The justification for my participation in this career are described in
the career strategy. Appropriate career paths are considered in the
career strategy.

## Constant Training

See Training strategy. Deliberate practice should be used, and training
is continuous.

### Preparation: Importance

The first great discovery may take a long time to come. The task is to
relentlessly prepare oneself for that great discovery. It is important
to keep working at the boundary of one’s abilities.

## Research

### Central pleasure of solving problems

The pleasure is great when you are tackling a problem,

  - which you are certain is worth tackling - guaranteeing enthusiastic
    effort;

  - requires you to invest an amount of thought and effort which is
    neither too small nor too huge in order to start reaping rewards;
    like activation energy in chemistry

  - you feel confident about making significant progress towards a
    solution - or even about solving it.

All other pleasurable activities associated with a research career -
such as mentoring, presentation, gathering knowledge etc - depend on
this for meaningful existence; so this is the primary pleasure. However,
one must take pleasure in these surrounding activities; as the
anticipation of the pleasure of solving problems may not provide
sufficient enthusiasm.

### The process

#### High level process for each problem

General loop: Find area. Find problem in a given area. Find solution
strategy for a given problem. Implement solution, evaluate, communicate.

"Read many papers; write many papers; repeat."

Popular research mode: Knowing and heavily using old techniques: take a
few hammers, hit everything with it. Finding new techniques is rare and
hard.

#### jJNAna-prApti: Learning an area

jJNAna-prApti-sUtraM pashyatu.

#### Problems: Finding candidates

##### Papers

In doing incremental-improvement research, it is important to be able to
critique papers, find their shortcomings, identify unsolved problems,
then to be able to solve them.

##### Talking to others

Another person may be facing a problem in research where you, having a
different perspective, may have a good solution strategy. Research shows
that this mode of finding and solving problems is results in very good
quality research.

#### Choosing problems to pursue

##### Judging impact: theory

The most applicable of all is a good theory.

##### Importance of selectivity

You don’t have enough time and energy to pursue all interests. So, must
be selective.

##### Fresh problems: Importance

Find your own, fresh problems and work on them. If a senior person is
not actively involved, it is much harder to beat others who have worked
in the field for years.

##### High vs Low impact work: balance

Aim for rough water. Devote adequate time to important research, like
Leslie Valiant.

Short term/ competitive research should be avoided. As Dijkstra
\[EWD637\] said, do not compete with your colleagues who are as well
equipped as you are to tackle a certain problem.

Andy Yao said this: When you get a paper accepted to a good conference,
the main effect is that it buys you some time: some number of weeks or
months during which the pressure to publish is off and you can focus on
exciting but very hard open problems. Thus, your work should be
organized to achieve a balance between projects that will probably
improve your vita, and projects that will most likely not get you
anywhere in the short term, but that are important in the long term.

#### Solving problems

See problem solving strategy.

#### Parallelism

Execute many research projects/ threads in parallel. Switch between
problems. Know when a project isn’t right for the present moment.

##### Time multiplexing

Must have a good way of dividing time amongst various activities.

This worked well in Fall 2009: Experiments from 4 or 5, reading and
classes before that.

### Collaboration and Team work

Even advisor advisee relationship is partly one of collaboration.

#### Benefits

##### Gives Encouragement

Doing research alone is possible; but it requires huge amount of focus
and determination; especially when it comes to doing less pleasant tasks
like experimentations and simulations.

From collaborations, even boring aspects of research become more
pleasant. Enthusiasm for research increases. It is also more
pleasurable. See benefits of pair programming in ’programming strategy’.

##### Toughness of problems solved

With different viewpoints, the probability of the problem being solved
is higher. Also more interesting problems often discovered.

It is also a source of new problems to attack.

Papers involving collaborations tend to have much higher impact and are
more cited.

Between-institution collaborations had a higher average impact.

#### Identifying good collaborations

If a collaboration yields much more pain than pleasure, more
discouragement than encouragement, it is probably a bad collaboration.
In a bad collaboration, stress is high and productivity is low.

#### Beginning collaborations

Present many papers. You will hear/ give ideas unrelated to what you/
others were thinking. Happened in the case of the use of affiliation
networks, microscopic node analysis in solving link prediction problems;
and in case of use of collaborative filtering in link prediction.

By presenting papers and generating ideas in others, reap goodwill and
increase reputation.

#### Executing a good collaboration

##### Contributing

Bring in enthusiasm, ideas and work. Show ownership, take initiative.

Be prompt in accomplishing what you promised: without it, collaborators
loose patience and interest, research projects then fizzle out. So, you
cannot work on too many things simultaneously.

Have clear communication, supply updates upon major milestones, inform
others about tough roadblocks which you could not tackle autonomously.

##### Feedback and setting the record

Use feedback well, but No groveling - correct unfounded statements and
suppositions about your work without fail.

##### Getting updates

Ask if the person who is most actively involved has new thoughts/ tried
new avenues about his research project.

Fix concrete date and time to discuss project, papers.

#### Technical discussions

People form opinions about your abilities partly through your ability to
communicate and collaborate well. This includes ability to propose
ideas, solve problems on the spot, having a supple mind.

It often involves making oral presentations of technical work - this is
described elsewhere.

Note down important things to follow up.

#### Industry

The initial meeting in industry:

"You do what I call "Shotgun Research" at some labs. You go into a
meeting with a person you haven’t met, and in the following one hour,
you have to bond with them, size them up, get their respect, quickly
formulate a problem that will match the interests of both of you, and
put in place the skeleton of a novel idea or direction or even a claim.
Then before the clock interferes you have to lay the foundation for how
the direction will be developed, and leave with a social contract. Later
of course you will refine the problem, nudge the direction and rewrite
the claims, and have to do the sweat work to make it a project or a
paper, but the initial shotgun meeting is the key." \[Muthu\]

### Multitasking

You end up balancing multiple research projects and teaching and
administrative tasks. You do need to find a way of making progress on
various projects simultaneously. The process is probably similar to the
way that we figure out how to balance career and family/ community life.

#### Balancing research activities

There should be effort and focus spent on both acquiring knowledge and
on solving difficult problems. One must do both daily.

In Fall 2009, I split time thus: Before 1600 or 1700 each day I focused
on theoretical thought and knowledge acquisition. After that, until
2000, I did experiments and focused on a single research problem. This
split worked very well.

### About marketing yourself

Note that selling your qualities is very different from selling your
work.

Let your work do nearly all the talking.

Discuss ideas and papers enthusiastically with others. Like prateeka,
lexing etc..

Do not hanker after credit, but rely on others’ honest to credit you for
your ideas. The most important thing is to find answers, not gain
credit.

### Academic visits

During academic visits, read their papers, and ask questions about it.

## Communicating research

### Importance

#### Sell work for timely impact

For your work to have a timely impact, others who might use your
research should know about it. It is absurd to expect others to do it
for you.

### Publishing venues

Workshops: Some explicitly deny that a presentation in a workshop does
not count as a publication. So such stuff is publishable elsewhere.
Other workshops are contrary.

Publish long versions of conference papers in journals.

1 top tier paper = many 2nd tier papers. It is far more important to
publish regularly in a top tier conference than to publish profusely in
a 2nd tier conference. Read papers from those conference and aim for
such work.

#### Publicising by emailing

If you discover a new exciting result in a hot area, it is a good idea
to inform others who have tackled similar problems about your result.
Eg: PratIk, raghu, inderjit did this with their compressed sensing/
matrix completion paper. Thence increase impact, get new suggestions.

### Writing

#### Objectives

To publicise an important discovery, and submit it for criticism and
improvement.

##### Let it be Explanatory

###### Telling a story

Write as if you are writing a story. The abstract and the conclusion
should contain mostly the same text, except one may say ’we will show’,
and the other should say ’we have shown’.

###### Don’t try to sound impressive

Academics have the bad habit of using jargon and stilted prose.
Explanatory writing sounds less impressive, and is longer. But it does
its job better. Otherwise, fewer people will be influenced by the idea,
more people will throw it away.

##### Help the reader\!

Keep writing lively, avoid turgidity.

##### Level of effort

Don’t polish papers endlessly, just go for the deadlines.

##### Citing others’ work

Ensure that you cite everyone in the program committee relevant to your
submission.

If you are writing a grant proposal, ensure that you include a huge
number of citations, to indicate to the reviewer that you have
sufficient knowledge of the area.

#### Planning

##### Itemized plan for each section

Make a plan document for every huge writing project. Write up section
names, fill section with itemized list of things which will go in the
section.

Useful in collaboration: Can then discuss this outline with others, get
their feedback.

Can rearrange content at a high level.

#### Implementation

##### Continuity: outline and summarize

In writing paragraphs or articles: state the topic, write the contents,
conclude by reminding the reader about what you’ve stated. Always start
with an outline.

Sentence = Part which refers to previous sentence(s) + part introducing
new idea. Paper, section, paragraph: introduction + point + discussion +
emphasis of point.

Repeatedly summarize.

##### Clarity

Think: "In what possible way can this be misunderstood?"

Avoid using pronouns like this, that and it when there is a gap of a few
sentences since prior reference to the subject: instead, be specific.

###### Terminology

Use consistent terminology - It will help the reader. Stop hunting for
synonyms in the thesaurus.

Give names: use ’red black technique’ rather than our technique.

##### Crispness

Let all sentences have a person-like subject.

Avoid: Weak verbs: "is", "was". Avoid adverbs. (Example: extremely
important or very redundant.) Avoid double negatives: "Otherwise, you
sound not unlike a windbag."

##### Formatting

Try to ensure that figures and tables fill the width of the space
allotted to them - let them not give the impression of being inserted
just to make the work seem substantial.

Always present numbers in tables right-justified.

##### Figures and tables

In many venues for presenting experimental research (eg KDD), figures
and tables can be added to make the work seem more substantial than they
actually are.

Presenting research: draw graphs which swoop up: ROC curve.

##### Dealing with space restrictions

Avoid too much repetition.

Make everything you say substantial. Avoid 2 sentence paragraphs.

Use latex tricks like vspace to reduce space towards the end of the
document.

#### Review

Do a self-review - read it aloud and read it cold.

A week before the deadline, send it out to friends and colleagues,
correct bugs.

### Oral presentation

Described in a separate chapter.
