---
title: Clothing
---
## Prelude
### Importance of right clothing

Norwegian proverb: There is no such thing as bad weather, only bad
clothing.

#### Importance of right attitude

The body can function well in extreme conditions, when the right
attitude is adapted. It is possible to wear an attitude suitable for the
cold, as eskimos do: one can welcome the cold temperature rather than
shun it. Similarly, one can welcome dryness and hot weather.

However, one must guard against the risk of inflicting damage to the
body by so tolerating extreme conditions.

### Goodness of fit

For full-arm clothes, sleeves should fit well: otherwise, it returns in
discomfort in the wrist as a result of repeated strain resulting from
putting an over-sized sleeve out of the way while working.

#### Things to check while trying out pants

Breath should not be forced or restricted while wearing the pants and
sitting.

Weave:

### Materials

#### Breathability

It is the weave of the fabric (the size and number of holes) that
determines breathability or resistance to air movement. Any woven or
knit fabric will breathe - even if the weave is made of rubber strands.

If the yarn on the outside of the garment is thinner than the yarn on
the inside of the garment, capillary action will pull water to the
outside. The increased surface area (not hollow fibre cores) of the thin
yarn gives the water more space to spread out. This type of construction
can be used in either Nylon or Polyester fabrics.

#### Wool

Wool is a good insulator, even when wet. Expensive, heavier, slow
drying, can be itchy.

##### Merino

Merino wool is very fine and does not irritate the skin.

#### Polyester

Artificial Fleece, aka polar fleece or microfleece, is a good insulator.
Usually made of PET of the polyester family. Suitable for outer and
middle layers. Can be made breathable: So suitable for physical exertion
involving perspiration.

##### Advantages

It is light, soft, comfortable, hydrophobic (holding less than 1% of its
weight in water when fully soaked), highly breathable. Dries fast.

##### Disadvantages

It tends to generate very high static electricity charges. This makes it
a magnet for pet hairs and other dust and fluff. Not windproof (although
some more expensive grades are denser and designed to be windproof. Can
be damaged by high-temperature washing and drying. But looses insulation
when wet. The down-side for polyester is odor retention, and lower
durability.

#### Cotton

Cotton absorbs water, and does not repel water. heavy.

Denim is cotton. Denim is a good wind breaker.

Material which is a suitable blend of cotton and polyester is desirable
for use as an insulator.

#### Goose down

Light, but breaks down with use. Excellent warmth to weight ratio. the
Achilles heel of down is that it loses all insulating properties when
wet; so good in combination with waterproof material.

#### Other materials

Silk has good wicking ability.

Lycra/ spandex: like wetsuits, very elastic. When putting a garment with
spandex in the dryer, it tends to dry out and the strands break meaning
the garment loses compression power.

Nylon: light, tough. Easily melts. Hydrophilic.

Nylon / lycra blend.

#### Rain proofing

Rainclothes made out of tightly knit nylon are rain and wind proof, and
are breathable.

Material which is water proof under 30000 mm of water is labelled water
proof. Highly water proof material is also highly windproof.

### Things to carry

A wallet with credit/ debit cards, cash, ID.

Keys

Multifunction Phone: with camera, internet abilities.

A handkerchief or some tissues.

A paper and pen for note taking.

### Repairs

Use good fabric glue : common ones do not stick well. Glue tapes are
hard to peel and use.

## Low temperature clothing

### General strategy

#### Layer up

Dressing with multiple layers of clothing essential, due to the wide use
of heated buildings. It also insulates better.

Wear a warm clothing a few minutes before stepping out - then, air will
be trapped inside the clothes.

#### Accesorize

use faceguards, gloves, etc.. for extremities. This provides additional
comfort. Eg: a hood not attached to the jacket provides improved
mobility.

#### Maintenance

Look for machine washable and dryable clothes.

### Base layer

See warm/ normal weather clothing.

#### Purpose

Warmth, moisture control while maintaining ease of movement. Fibers will
wick (move) moisture away from your skin and pass it through the fabric
so it will evaporate.

##### Material choice

Underwear made of polyester fiber do this, but they irritate the skin.

Merino wool thermals and balaclavas have been tried successfully.

### Insulation layer

#### Materials

Cold weather (\<50F) = a polyester-wool blend rip stop fabric.

Temperate (50-80F) = a 65%/35% polyester/cotton blend rip stop fabric.

#### Sweatshirt

This can be used during dry days. Choose ones with light but warm hoods,
for convenience. Zipped sweatshirts’ insulation is adjustable, and they
are easy to remove.

80/20 and 50/50 Cotton, polyester/ fleece blends have been used before.

#### Pants

Use polyester, which wicks away moisture while providing warmth Eg:
running pants.

#### Long Underwear

Wear thermal underwear over normal underwear, in order to reduce need
for washing.

Avoid thermal underwear made out of artificial material, as this will
lead to skin irritation. Fine merino wool thermal underwear was used
successfully.

Thickness / Weight of the underwear should be chosen based on operating
temperature.

Don’t buy leg warmers/ sleeves: tendency to slip. Instead modify a
merino wool long underwear by cutting out the genital area: ye will use
it on top of normal underwear anyway.

#### Pants

Can use pants made out of thick materials, such as Jeans/ Denim,
Corduroy, Cargo pants.

Corduroy pants made out of a 66/33 cotton/ polyester blend have been
successfully used for insulation.

Or can use down pant for excellent warmth. Eg: Made by Cabela’s.

28 inch waist, 30 inch inseam relaxed fit Denim jeans were too tight
around the crotch, restricted breath while sitting down. 29 inch and 30
inch waist relaxed fit corduroy pants have been successfully used.

### Outer layer

#### Purpose

Protection from rain and wind. Must be easily packable.

This can be same as rain clothing.

#### Overcoat

Buy slightly larger size to accommodate multiple layers of clothing.

Choose coats with large pockets.

This could be a rain and wind stopping shell, without insulation.

Choose coats with storm hoods, preferably detachable.

Choose clothes with strings to close sleeves.

belt for heavy coat - the waist is designed to carry weight.

#### Pants

Choose clothes with strings to close sleeves.

Avoid cotton or denim, as they get wet easily.

### Insulation and protection of extremities

#### Headgear

An estimated 30% of your body heat escapes through your head.

Hoods are more effective than caps and hats, as they protect the ears.
can take balaclava and alter it, so that you don’t have to pull it over.

Protecting face: Cold wind hits you while cycling. Use face guard with
hole for the nose: nose drips when you return to a warm place from the
cold.

##### Material choice

Wool can be irritating. Polyester and merino wool balaclava has been
tried successfully.

#### Scarf

Better for mobility than attached hood. wind can get in between coat and
hood.

#### Gloves

Leather gloves are breathable on hot days, while protecting from the
wind.

All weather light weight gloves provide good insulation too.

### Shoes

Instep crampons are useful for walking on ice.

### Sleeping gear

Down goose: Down bags are considered superior because of their
phenomenal warmth-to-weight and warmth-to-bulk ratios. While a synthetic
bag will weigh somewhat more than a down bag at an equivalent
temperature rating, synthetic bags perform better when wet.

Use sleeping bags with the right temperature rating. it is more
difficult to stay warm in an insufficiently insulated bag than it is to
vent a bag designed for cooler temperatures.

Prefer water resistant ones. Look for small stuff size and light weight.

Line the inside of the sleeping bag with a sheet, in order to reduce
need to wash. Wear long underwear and layers to sleep.

Consider sleeping bag liners to add insulation.

Mateable bags can be zipped together.

## High/ normal temperature clothing

### Materials

Cotton is popular. Absorbs sweat etc.. Better is something which wicks
away moisture: like nylon weave.

#### Underwear

#### Purpose

Prevent outer garments from being soiled by body fluids, body oils and
perspiration. Provide support for genitalia.

#### Strategy

Use good (Jockey) boxer briefs with the elastic band embedded inside the
cloth.

### Upper body

Use T shirts next to the body. Use collarless, light colored ones if
wearing a formal shirt above.

### Pants

Buy pants which sit on the waist.

## Extremities

### Shoes

#### Heavy or formal use

Use water proof, breathable boots, with minimal heaviness. It must be
usable even on formal occasions.

##### Lace

Shoes that don’t require lace-tying are generally looser and more
uncomfortable during brisk walks.

There are shoes which can be easily (un)tied by just pulling a loop. Use
these.

Use easy to tie lace: lock/ elastic/ speed/ quick/ lace.

##### Avoid plastic shoes

Leather boots, rather than plastic boots, are breathable.

##### Quality of manufacture

Shoes bought from good companies, though more expensive, last longer.

#### Comparison with slippers

See slipper section.

#### Necessity of socks

See discussion about high-adherance slippers in the slippers section.

### Slippers

#### Comparison with shoes

##### Adherance

Slippers in general, adhere more lightly to the bottom of the feet than
shoes do. Among slippers too, there are different levels of adherence.

walking is more cumbersome if adherence to feet is low. But, slippers
which have higher adherance usually require socks for comfort, often
because of the sweat and heat generated by close contact.

##### Adherence, protection, ease of wearing

Slippers offer lower protection from the surroundings.

Slippers are usually easier to wear than shoes, which often require
tying of lace. Shoes that don’t require lace-tying are generally looser
and more uncomfortable during brisk walks.

##### Coolness

Much cooler in summer.

#### Absorbant soles

Prefer slippers with absorbant, possibly antimicrobial soles - they are
more comfortable and less smelly in summer.

#### High adherance slippers

##### Beach socks

Like shoes, with nylon mesh top. Require socks. Available in walmart.

### Socks

Use thick jockey socks: less smelly.

Or consider materials which wick away moisture.

### Eye

#### Purpose

Avoid the discomfort of having to squint at the sun. Or remove glare
from either the computer screen or from reflected light. Or improve
visibility at night.

#### Choices

Buy some light safety glasses which fit over prescription eye-glasses,
with either smoke or yellow tinted lenses. Sunglasses should ideally
cover the entire visual range where the sun strikes the eyes: even the
top. For this reason, clip-on sunglasses are inadequate.

Or Use Prescription sun glasses or sun glasses which fit over glasses.

### Sun screen

Buy sunscreen with high SPF, but avoid ones with oxytocin (a synthetic
estrogen which easily penetrates the skin).

## Special occasion clothing

### Rain clothing

Breathable rain clothing, with sealed seams are good.

Full zip rain pants are easy to wear and remove.

### Swimwear

Wetsuits, fast drying underwear.

### Hindu ceremonial dress

KachchE panche with uttarIya or with a jubba: wearing technique
explained in customs survey.

## Carrying things

### Belt

Useful not only for holding up pants tightly to the waist, ensuring good
weight distribution, but also enables attachments like pouches.

Buy a synthetic material belt, ideally one which can be used in
professional circumstances, with very little metal (no big belt buckle),
so that it need not be removed for airport security checks.

### Cargo pants/ shorts

Can be found in military stores or online. Professional look is
achievable.

If heavy items are carried in lower pockets, belt is required.

Carrying items in back pant pockets can slightly affect sitting posture.

### Vests

#### Types and purchase spots

Tactical vests are not suitable. Ranger vests or (photo) journalists/
travel/ carry vests have many large pockets inside and outside (both in
the front and in the back). Ranger vests tend to come with full zipper.
Journalist vests tend to have larger and more pockets. Those made with
mesh are the lightest.

If a suitable material (cotton or polyester + cotton or mesh) is used,
the vest is light and breathable, therefore is fit for use in summer.

#### Neatness

Black colored ones tend to complement light colored shirts well, and are
suitable for professional use.

Goodness of fit is variable. In good vests a draw chord is provided.

Can be used to hide crumpled shirt and loose fitting pants.

#### Use in Carrying/ storing

They distribute weight over the shoulders very well; thus they are very
comfortable.

One can store items in the vest while varying shirts and pants.

It is also convenient to place all carried contents together for
inspection at airports.

### Non-clothes Attachments

Bags.

### Pouches

Often equipped with special detachable loops, so that the pouch can
easily be attached to a belt. These are often marked Molle compatible
pouches in Military stores, where they are often available for cheap.

#### Waist pouches

Maxpedition thermite versipack is conveniently part of a belt.

#### Leg drop pouches

The lower strap, if tied can cause chafing; so it is a good idea to
leave it untied.
