---
title: Misc topics
---

{नूतन-टिप्पणयो [ऽत्र](https://checkvist.com/checklists/641547/tasks/29197530)।}


## Retain important knowledge/ skills, discover problems

General properties of memory and various techniques for strengthening
memory is considered elsewhere.

### Retention of important knowledge

#### Reconstruction ability

One must be able to reconstruct important knowledge acquired so far,
relevant to the subject being studied, from scratch. This must be done
with minimal external reference, and with the power of one’s memory and
abilities. This is helpful in preparing the mind for studies and in
solidifying knowledge. For thoroughness of topics covered, a reference
sheet may be used.

Being able to reproduce complex proofs without notes is an important
skill. Eg: Pradeep presenting many proofs of statistical learning
theory, VCD, packing number etc.. PratIka presenting ICML papers.

#### Notes/ surveys

##### Identify core ideas

A complex concept is just an arrangement of a few simple ideas. This is
important while making notes.

Learning involves repeated summarization.

##### Succinct summarization

Record important patterns of ideas and solution strategies, with
examples/ counter-examples and important results. View surveys as
embedding the graph of ideas in two dimensions. The idea is to embed a
network of ideas on a sheet.

Capture the most central ideas; ideas which evoke the strongest and the
most unusual reactions. Ignore the rest. Be able to summarize the
essentials of a paper in a few paragraphs/ sentences. This is useful as
a mnemonic, as a useful device while re-reading the details, and as a
block to be used in reasoning.

##### Vividness

In the surveys, note important and surpising things, which evoke a
reaction other than the usual; make things vivid. Consider making them
colorful.

Ignore and skip unimportant information.

For closeness to the subject, it is important to have favorite examples.

### Mining for fresh problems

It is very important to critique a paper or a talk, understand its
shortcomings, suggest future improvements. Thence, incremental research
occurs.

OFTEN, perturb the problem and extrapolate a solution. This is a very
important skill.
